Now that we've taken a look at the mounting phase of our component after our component has been mounted
onto the door.
Any future updates either to the props to the state or US manually forcing an update on our component
will cause our component to go into the updating phase.
So what is the updating phase and what triggers updates.
Well if for example inside of our app J.S. we're passing in the text value off of this dot state right
into our lifecycle method which for us is this string where whenever we click the button we just append
underscore hello to that string.
We just make it longer and longer right which we can see right here.
Every time we update and click this and update our state and this new state value gets passed into our
lifecycle component.
Our lifecycle component goes into the updating phase and it's like oh I got new props I should probably
re render my component not remount though our component is already mounted.
It doesn't need to go through mounting again.
It doesn't need to be destroyed because react doesn't want to create new elements for doing that is
actually very costly on the browser but selectively changing pieces of the HDD Himmel inside of our
component is way easier because all it needs to change is this dot prompts that text it doesn't need
to change the h three it doesn't need to change that did so reacts like oh OK I'm just going to update
this stop props that text right or I'm not also going to run through those lifecycle methods that might
be affected in this updating phase because the props have changed and maybe these lifecycle methods
do use the props to do something right.
That's all up to us and how we want to write our code.
The promises changed.
I'm going to start going through my update cycle the update cycle could also be triggered if this starts
set state gets called inside of our component so we don't actually call set state inside of our life
cycles class because we don't have state right which is fine but if we look at our app component we
do have state and we do call sets date whenever we click either these button.
So whenever we click one of these buttons react re renders this component as well it goes through the
update phase of our app component as well because there might be things inside of our component that
depends on the state to determine what they need to do including our render.
If for example we were displaying this stored state DOT text inside of our component ourselves the component
needs to decide OK I should probably re render because there's a chance that this component is rendering
something on the state.
So that's why it does it.
It's like OK the components state has changed as well.
Let's also run through our update phase for our component and then finally we can also force an update
by calling this stuff force update inside of our component anywhere.
This forces the component to update everything.
It just forces to go through the update phase but inside of the Update phase it just goes through these
following methods.
So just like our mounts.
Right.
It also goes to the render again because new pops comes in or new state comes in.
React has to go through its process of deciding oh what in my components changed and then it's going
to update the Dom.
Right.
So it's going to update the DOM with the changes that are required in that component.
Again we're not re mounting that component we're just making the change.
That piece of the component where it's affected and then it calls component it updates similar to component
at Mount.
It's the lifecycle method that gets called after the updates have been made to the DOM and here we can
see this when we click Update text right we see it calls render and then it calls our component it update.
One thing I want is to look at is actually this lifecycle method.
So I'm going to put it in here.
It's should a component update should component update is a lifecycle method that determines whether
or not this whole chain needs to happen.
And it actually exists between these things that would trigger this updating phase that happen and the
following lifecycle methods to get triggered should component update actually sits right here.
And what it does is it gets the prompts and then the next state right.
So it gets when prompts change they come in as a parameter or when state changes.
It also comes in as a parameter and what happens is that based on the prompts the new prompts that are
coming in or the new state after we've called said state we can determine whether or not we want to
go through these other lifecycle methods including actually re rendering our component.
Right.
Because if we don't want to render a component we don't have to.
And how we would do this is actually if we looked at our app J.S. So for example whenever said state
gets called we know that what gets happened is our render call it gets called right in our component.
So whenever we call set state we're actually re rendering this whole app just component which actually
ends up re rendering the life cycles component even if we were not passing this text in this component
because it's a child of our app G.S. gets re rendered.
I can actually show you if I get rid of this prop so we're no longer passing the prop into our lifecycle
method even though I click Update text you will see that our render method and then component it update
is getting called from a life cycles component.
This is because of how reacts no tree works react knows that inside of this component any of the children
might need to be re rendered because it's just going to assume that everything in the render is affected
possibly by the state changing or new props coming into this component.
Right.
So whenever a component gets updated re rendered all the children also get re rendered and this happens
whenever.
Again as we saw props change or set state gets called or force update gets called inside of the component.
Now the reason this is important is because let's say we called set state on a property that are lifecycle
method doesn't care about let's say for example we had a another state property.
I don't know message right.
And then this value we used somewhere else inside of this component we don't pass it into life cycles
as a prop we just use it somewhere else.
Well if set state gets called the updates its message we just saw that it's going to force our component
to update right and our component if the state text hasn't changed.
Why do we need to re render our life cycles component.
That's a waste of processing power.
It's a it's slowing down our browser.
So what we could do here is it allows us to selectively hijack and not go through that re render right.
We don't have to re render our component and here we can see we do that by what gets returned as a boolean
value from should component update if we return true then our component will update it will continue
will go through right the cycles and it will run through that component it update and here we actually
see us logging the next prompts that we're getting right.
So whenever we collect update text we see that the text is coming through.
Right.
That's the property.
The new text property that we're getting.
But if we return false what happens is that it doesn't even go through any of those lifecycle methods
except for QA component update because when we return false we're saying I don't want my component to
re render.
And the reason we would do this is for example if we were to check the next props that we're getting
if we see that the string value for our text has not changed then we don't care to update them.
We don't need to.
There's no reason for us to do that.
And here we will see that if we click Update text we're getting this call our show component update.
But because we're turning false it does not go through the next cycle methods that need to happen inside
of our updating phase.
And the reason we would do this as I mentioned is because maybe we don't want to re render because our
text didn't change and we can actually force this to happen if inside of our button click instead of
a pending hello we just keep the text as what it is.
But because we're calling set state we're forcing the state to change and because we're forcing the
state to change or forcing react to re render our component.
So now inside of our lifecycle methods what we can do is here we can actually say we want to return
instead of false.
We want to return if next prompts dot text does not equal.
This stop prompts dot text.
So if the current text is the same as the next prompts text then don't re render because there's no
point to write.
We don't need to re render our component because our props have not changed.
So now we'll see if we click up a text it doesn't update but if we go back and we say that.
OK.
Now the Texas changing.
Well then our component will update accordingly.
So this is mainly just for performance if the properties coming in are not different than the props
that we already have then there's no reason to re render now understanding this update phase is so fundamental
to us becoming better react developers because much of how code is structured and how the architecture
for react is written is based around this update phase because this is fundamentally what the reactive
library does for us.
This is why we write components.
This is why we break our code up the way it does because this update phase is how react makes our lives
easier for us whenever it updates the DOM based on new properties coming in based on US calling set
state or forcing updates inside of our components.
This triggers a chain reaction of for example our app component updating also its children not only
rendering itself but re rendering any child components it has.
And then those child components also update but that's the thing.
If we trigger big updates like this there may not be a need to even update these components if as we
saw the props do not actually change if the prompts Don't change nothing about this component needs
to update so leveraging the lifecycle methods will allow us to possibly improve the performance of our
application but also give us a better idea of when we should do what with our components.
Now of course we're going to practice more and more with writing our components billing react applications.
But just thinking and keeping this in the back of your mind as we code will help you better understand
why we structure the code the way that it is.
This will all make more and more sense the more you code in react.
Now I know this was a bit of a longer lesson but now that we understand with the update phase let's
move on to the last phase the UN mounting phase.